time be generously rewarded by NASA.  Young descended those final few
ernstig aan twijfelen. Hij blijkt een van de velen te zijn die, in
daartoe een nuttige bijdrage levert, is de vraag.
uiting van persoonlijke ontgoocheling, die meer heeft van een litanie
It must have been so tempting to go for a landing. Cernan was wistful:
moon by Neil and Buzz.  The willingness of the Apollo 10 crew to serve
Apollo flights had to become both safer and more daring at the same
tail hook down and we're there," said Mr. Stafford during the Apollo
Roger Chaffee — who perished in the 1967 Apollo 1 fire.  Successive
gedragen moeten worden, ook al is het soms tegen wil en dank [mijn
Why Apollo 10 Stopped Just 47,000 Feet From the Moon In a year when
never know how big this thing is when there ain't nobody in here but
nationale' vertonen, Europa geen prioriteit meer bij de politici kan
simple: Practice and work out the kinks and set the stage for a
voert waar hij het mee eens is. In het interview met Laura Starink in
Galveston Bay too!" What ran through their minds when the command
was one critical order: don't actually land on the moon.  It would be
this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him
moon walker, "that there's enough boulders down here to fill up
Europese eenwording zich voltrekt.' Voordat alle deelnemende landen
descent; and, the lonely vigil of Michael Collins in orbit above his
Nederland betreft, is dat waar, maar of zijn gemoedsuitstorting
remembered and celebrated.  An Earthrise taken by Apollo 10.
scientists and others both in government and industry. It also cost
Project Gemini, NASA's precursor to Apollo. Their mission aboard was
Isabella had sent a ship to the New World in 1491 and asked its
crew. Transcripts of their conversations reveal that they didn't have
sending a party to scout passage to the Pacific Ocean in 1803, then
ging. 'Als iets ongenadig duidelijk is geworden, dan is het de
de eurocrisis die hem de ogen opende voor het werkelijke Europa, en
eenheid. Ook Joop den Uyl stelde als minister-president in 1973 zulke
that they took to help America to win that sprint, deserve to be
down and we're there," said Mr. Stafford during the Apollo 10 mission.
dubbed "Charlie Brown" for the Apollo 10 mission to the moon, viewed
Spectator, waarvan hij de hoofdredacteur is. Maar dat is een
missen. Duitsland is volgens hem te streng voor de Zuid-Europese
Earthrise and it's got to be magnificent!"  The view of the stark
trailblazers, and their story adds richness and humanity to the
order: don't actually land on the moon.  The command service module,
the pathfinders who completed the same mission with one critical
aboard Charlie Brown, Cernan called out, "Oh Charlie! We just saw
Op grond van de vele reizen die Geert Mak door Europa heeft gemaakt en
politici in de eerste plaats verantwoording verschuldigd zijn aan hun
was just as excited, exclaiming, "We are close, babe! This is, like,
vormen in veel landen een macht die electoraal niet te veronachtzamen
three-day Earth to Moon cruise; lunar orbit undocking; descent of the
opnieuw centraal stellen', zegt hij aan het eind.  Centraal stellen?
- Mak grossiert in het werkwoord moeten zonder onderzocht te hebben of
deze krant van 3 januari komt hij uit op Duitsland als leider, maar
splashdown — were the same risks the Apollo 11 crew would have to
over een verloren liefde dan van een analyse? Mak zegt zelf dat er
Aldrin during the critical moments of the Eagle lander's final
it!"  Snapping photos out the window and noting the many boulders that
(nationale) kiezers, die een 'toenemende voorkeur voor het eigene en
launchpad. Apollo 10's officers had all earned astronaut wings during
this month.  Spurred by President John F. Kennedy's 1961 speech
worden geschapen, zoals dat in veel landen in de 19de eeuw op
mogelijk. Dat brengt hem in de buurt van De Gaulles 'Europa der
the ship to set foot on them, because the next captain and crew were
as something like stand-ins instead of the stars of the show would in
history of the race to the moon. Their achievements, and the risks

finally came from Houston to fire the ascent engine and head back up?
mates, waiting to bring them back home.  But we also need to celebrate
take, with one distinction. A moon landing was not to be.  They
returned to the moon, he was the American commander of the
gelijknamige televisieserie zou je verwachten dat hij ook een kenner
centraal stellen van de democratie?  Hij doet wel meer uitspraken
commanded the first flight of the space shuttle. Cernan, too, made it
van Europa was. Zijn laatste publicatie, een pamflet van 94 pagina's, doet daar
it was built. All of the risks that they would take to prove out the
cursivering, JLH]'. Hij geeft dus prioriteit aan Europese eenheid
human footsteps were at last emblazoned on the dusty surface of the
emerging détente between the world's superpowers.  In the annals of
nationaal niveau is gebeurd.' Nu was die eeuw de eeuw van
lunar landscape below them from that altitude, scarred by billions of
They would eventually guide the lander to within only about 47,000
nationalisme, en daar waren twee wereldoorlogen het gevolg van. Wil
politisering die Mak waarschijnlijk niet zint. Niettemin: populisten
supranationale ideaal toch al duidelijk? Mak stipt ze nu wel aan, maar
then blast off again. According to Craig Nelson, author of the book
50th anniversary of the first humans to walk on the moon.  We remember
het eens worden over het soort samenleving - een meer socialistische
the crew of Apollo 9 in March 1969, to fly the first test mission of
willen brengen, is belangrijker dan het tempo waarin het proces van
Europa blijven bestaan'. Geen goede basis dus voor een politieke
'cause they might!'"  Two months later as the entire world looked on,
'diepgaande cultuurverschillen, die, ondanks alle samenwerking, binnen
perform a full dress-rehearsal of the Apollo 11 mission just two
journeys to the lunar surface. But the astronauts of Apollo 10 were
from the lunar module "Snoopy" in 1969.  Soon we will recognize the
waarvan hij verslag heeft gedaan in zijn boek In Europa (2004) en een
successful landing on the moon (and safe return to Earth).  But there
miles to the moon's surface as commander of Apollo 16, and later
tot een echte analyse komt hij niet. Terecht zegt hij dat het 'bovenal
they began to fall toward the surface, Cernan quipped back, "You'll
getrompetter voelen we ons slechts zelden Europeaan'. Er zijn
one guy," Young told his departing friends from his lonely outpost. As
re-docking; three more days back to Earth; then a Pacific Ocean
onbestuurbaarheid van het huidige Europa als supranationale eenheid.'
Cernan undocked for their descent toward the landing site in the
ogen openhield, waren de werkelijke oorzaken van het falen van het
waarvan hij de portee niet lijkt te hebben doordacht. Zoals: 'Er moet'
of people we were: 'Don't give those guys an opportunity to land,
"It looks like we're getting so close all you have to do is put your
almost everything that Aldrin, Armstrong and Collins did, but they
is.  Hij zegt dat de Europese landen 'een dringende behoefte aan meer
saying, don't touch a thing, especially not the ocean — because Lewis
staten', vervloekt door Maks geestverwanten.  Heeft hij dit werkelijk
democratieën supranationale vraagstukken eigenlijk wel kunnen
set, then for a full dress rehearsal by the next crew to the
years of impact cratering, was just as stunning to the
hij werkelijk een Europees nationalisme?  Wat is het nut van zo'n
months beforehand. Commander Thomas P. Stafford; John W. Young, the
een politieke crisis' is. We moeten dan ook 'de politiek en democratie
Earth orbit in a joint effort to redirect the space race toward an
betekent en dat de 'Europese besluiten door de Europese burgers
is', en daarmee bedoelt hij het Europese project dat in 1950 van start
Armstrong making those first bootprints; the cool bravado of Buzz
"Rocket Men," Cernan speculated that the lander's ascent module had
except it would be nice to be around here more often  "  "It looks
lander nicknamed Snoopy almost to the surface; reascending and
captain and crew to find new lands to the west without getting out of
would be the first crewed lunar mission to fly the command module
feet above the surface — close enough to test the landing radar and
het is 'doodzonde' dat de Duitsers daarvoor de 'grootsheid'
snit', zegt Jan Rood in het januarinummer van de Internationale
unfathomable, to go all that way, to take all of those risks and then
safely to the Earth," NASA went on an 8-year lunar sprint. This bold
centrale leiding' hebben - maar dan wel een leiding die een beleid
much free time to admire it though, given the intense concentration
at one point Stafford remarked, "It looks like we're getting so close
time to meet Kennedy's deadline. Delays in the completion of the lunar
"The spacecraft is looking good and there are no problems, Charlie,
surface. While relaying their reactions and perspective back to Young
dit ook moge betekenen)? Eerder heeft hij al de vraag gesteld of 'onze
equipment and procedures — launching; Earth-orbital docking; the
lander, also known as the Lunar Excursion Module, meant that Apollo 8
dat ziet er heel anders uit dan het gedroomde. In eerste plaats: er is
of een meer conservatieve - dat tot stand gebracht moet worden, kunnen
the lander into space, spending 10 days in Earth orbit.  The stage was
we'll celebrate Apollo 11's 50th anniversary, it's worth remembering
'gebrek aan Europese identiteit. Ondanks al die jaren van Europees
around the same maximum altitude of commercial aircraft above Earth's
borne by the relatively unheralded crew of Apollo 10 fifty years ago
executed the rehearsal flawlessly. While Young circled above them in
10 mission. But Snoopy didn't have enough fuel to land on the moon and
al lang gepolitiseerd, al is het 'een politisering van populistische
gebeurde'.  Geen goed uitgangspunt voor een journalist.  Het was pas
challenging the nation to "commit itself to achieving the goal, before
Op die manier komt er natuurlijk niets terecht van de Europese
to the surface as the commander of Apollo 17 in 1972, and is still the
the many pathfinders who made this historic mission possible. Among
the lives of three heroic astronauts — Gus Grissom, Ed White, and
the most critical were the crew of Apollo 10, who were asked to
all you have to do is put your tail hook down and we're there." Cernan
sense, though, those were the instructions, and that was the burden,
the command and service module nicknamed Charlie Brown, Stafford and
referring to their geologist-astronaut colleague and future Apollo 17
hanteren'. Goeie vraag, want steeds duidelijker wordt het dat, omdat
Op z'n hoogst is 'een losser verband van Europese staten'
'nooit een goede publieke discussie' over Europa is geweest. Wat
endeavor would employ close to a half million engineers, technicians,
like we're getting so close all you have to do is put your tail hook
history, the mission of Apollo 10 has been overshadowed by later
boven democratie. Dat is tenminste eerlijk. Maar hoe klopt dat met het
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975, docking with Soviet counterparts in
been short-fueled on purpose: "A lot of people thought about the kind
(and occasional computer glitch repair) needed to fly Snoopy.  Still,
they could clearly see, Stafford proclaimed, "Tell Jack Schmitt,"
scheduled to do that in 1492.  Or picture President Thomas Jefferson
weggeven van soevereiniteit 'ook het inleveren van democratie'
stopped just before landing on the moon.  Imagine if Ferdinand and
Wat betekent dat precies? Trouwens, als thema is de Europese eenheid
pas ontdekt tijdens de eurocrisis van de laatste jaren? Voor wie zijn
eenheid.  Daar wanhoopt hij dan ook aan. 'Ik vrees dat het voorbij
pull back, not grabbing the brass ring and reaping the rewards. In a
the first time the moon lander was flown in the environment for which
never know how small it looks when you're as far away as we are."
and Clark are scheduled to do that the following year.  It seems
gebaseerd was op wat we hoopten dat er zou gebeuren, niet op wat er
and celebrate the heroism of the Apollo 11 crew: the humility of Neil
command module pilot; and Eugene A. Cernan, lunar module pilot, did
only, from which 1968's famed "Earthrise" photo was taken. It fell to
we lang wachten.  En democratie, die Mak ook centraal wil stellen (wat
zondaren. Leiderschap accepteert hij dus alleen op zijn voorwaarden.
voorwaarden: 'De vraag wat voor samenleving wij in Europa tot stand
last person to have walked on the moon.  Although Stafford never again
hebben (zo het die ooit heeft gehad).  Mak meent dan ook dat het
zijn eigen woorden, 'te lang vastgehouden hebben aan een realiteit die
het wel kan - 'op Europees niveau eindelijk een publieke eenheid
smooth, dark volcanic plains of the Sea of Tranquillity.  "You'll